Add Sequential Order Numbering Guide (#520)
workarea-commerce/workarea: docs/source/articles/sequential-order-numbering.html.md

---
title: Sequential Order Numbering
created_at: 2020/09/24
excerpt: "In Workarea, orders (and other persisted data) are identified in a different manner from relational databases in order to avoid collisions. This guide explains how Workarea identifies orders, and how you might want to customize this for vanity purposes."
---

# Sequential Order Numbering

> In relational database systems, identifiers are typically numbers that are automatically incremented. Many ecommerce systems, both in the past and still running today, are built around relational databases in order to persist their data. As a result, order identifiers tend to have a "numerical" look to them, so much so that the colloqualism "order number" has been adopted throughout the industry. In Workarea, orders (and other persisted data) are identified in a different manner to avoid collisions when the backing database store is distributed amongst many machines. This guide explains how Workarea identifies orders, and how you might want to customize this for vanity purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In relational database systems, identifiers are typically numbers that are automatically incremented. Many ecommerce systems, both in the past and still running today, are built around relational databases. As a result, order identifiers tend be numerical, so much so that the colloqualism "order number" has been adopted throughout the industry. In Workarea, orders (and other persisted data) are identified in a different manner to avoid collisions when the backing database store is distributed amongst many machines. This guide explains how Workarea identifies orders, and how you might want to customize this for vanity purposes.
```

Unnecessary words, and "numerical" isn't a "look", it's either a number or it's not.

## How Workarea Identifies Orders

> When an order is created or instantiated, it is assigned a randomized 5-digit uppercase hexadecimal value as its ID. Workarea does this so order numbers are legible to human eyes, and will play nicely on a distributed database system such as MongoDB. This ID is used throughout the system to link orders to their Payment and Shipping information, as well as in the admin for display purposes. Although this order ID is "randomized", `SecureRandom` generation uses the current system time to determine a seed value for its algorithm, so when compared, they are actually sequential already:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an order is created or instantiated, it is assigned a randomized 5-digit uppercase hexadecimal value as its ID. Workarea does this so order numbers are legible to human eyes, and will play nicely on MongoDB. This ID is used throughout the system to link orders to their Payment and Shipping information, as well as in the admin for display purposes. Although this order ID is "randomized", `SecureRandom` generation uses the current system time to determine a seed value for its algorithm, so when compared, they are actually sequential already:
```

Brevity!

```ruby
def test_sequential_order_numbering
  orders = [create_order, create_order]

>   assert(orders.second.id > orders.first) # => true

Reviewer: You probably meant: 
```suggestion
  assert(orders.second.id > orders.first.id) # => true
```

>   assert(orders.second < orders.first) # => true

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be:

```suggestion
  assert(orders.second.id < orders.first.id) # => true
```

Author: It should actually be `assert(orders.second.id > orders.first.id)` :D

Author: this actually should be `assert(orders.second.id > orders.first.id)` :D

end
```

> However, Workarea's order IDs definitely don't look "numerical", and may be confusing to read for those used to relational systems. For this reason, you may want to customize how admins view orders on their site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, Workarea's order IDs definitely don't look numerical, and may not be what people are used to. For this reason, merchants may insist on customizing how admins view orders on their site.
```

1) Let's not create the thought they might be confusing and 2) let's imply they are pushing back (which they should be). 😄

Author: I like the second part, but I'm not sure we're "creating" the thought here for merchants if they're asking for this in the first place. I will reword it, however, to drive home the point that a _merchant_ is the one who asks for this, not a developer.

Reviewer: What I mean is they might not have been thinking about that and now by mentioning it they may go "hmm, _are_ these confusing?"

## Customizing Sequential Order Numbers

> Some clients may want this display ID to be sequentially numbered. This is possible to customize, but there's one caveat to keep in mind when doing so: MongoDB is a **distributed database**, so in production there are many instances of Mongo running to make sure that your app's data is not only within reach, but can be retrieved efficiently. This can lead to gaps in the order numbers, as well as order numbers appearing out of order in the admin (since Workarea only shows you orders which have been placed).

Reviewer: It seems like we should explain the caveats _after_ introducing the approach. They need to wrap their heads around it. Maybe before and after to try to drive the message home?

Author: I'd like to do both before & after because I feel like the caveats are worth mentioning a few times.
